last things first the comparison between
the Vietnam War and the United States
and it's still ongoing endeavor to
conquer and occupy Afghanistan the
comparison between the two is flawed
because the reality of what happened in
Vietnam is that the United States won
militarily but was completely defeated
politically whereas in Afghanistan the
United States has won politically but
has been defeated militarily the context
of this video is that in just the last
few days the Western press has been
jumping all over quote-unquote the
Afghanistan papers and even the naming
of these papers the naming of them as
such is an intentional allusion to
comparison to the Pentagon Papers that
came out during the Vietnam War and it
is somewhat bizarre that the main
complaint being made by the Western
media is that the public the general
public in America were lied to about
what had been happening in Afghanistan I
think most of my viewers will agree with
me I'm not saying everyone was just the
type of people who watch my channel for
politics for me there were absolutely no
surprises you people feel you've been
lied to this is exactly what I've been
reading in the last 10 years and more
you know this is this is all very
familiar to me this is what I was again
maybe we have been reading the same news
source or something but the type of
reflections the types of meditations on
the US military's lack of success in
Afghanistan none of this was shocking
are new to me none of it was really even
a contrast to the type of reporting and
analysis I've become accustomed to on
Afghanistan I have a very strong memory
now when the United States was ten years
into the war in Afghanistan there was a
report where the journalist was standing
next to the most senior general the
highest-ranking commander on the
American side in Afghanistan and that a
big map rolled out the table and the
general was explaining how ten years
into the combat ten years they were
fighting to try to secure basic supply
lines basic row
for trade and transport in and out of
the capital city in Afghanistan and he
was explaining how you know if they can
just achieve this in the next few months
or next few years then it will be
possible for farmers in Afghanistan to
stop farming opium and instead start
farming other crops because the thing is
but opium is it doesn't require
refrigeration it doesn't require that
you transport it rapidly you know you
can you can wait a long time to ship
opium slowly but he was saying once once
the Taliban is driven off these roads
then farming will flourish and democracy
will flourish and everyone's gonna
support the American installed there and
I was just laughing and laughing I was
laughing out loud because this was being
presented to the audience as like news
of victory like news that the war was
going well like no no when you're ten
years into the war and you can't drive
between the only two cities that the
country has Afghanistan doesn't have
that many booming metropolis when like
you know there only are about three
highways you're in the whole country
that you need to secure and you haven't
secured any of those three highways you
know like guys this is not victory if
this is news of defeat this is showing
you be ongoing defeat fully ten years
into the war with a trillion dollar
budget and I think the same thing could
basically be said today you know of
course in some ways things have changed
but so to say I I don't feel I've been
lied to
it may be that I'm reading very
different sort of news than the average
person is getting excited about
so-called what's going to say Pentagon
Papers this so-called Afghanistan papers
all right so when we understand a
conflict the question of what we compare
it to historically matters morally it
matters ethically it matters in how we
receive the news of the cost of war and
how we rationalize the cost of war so to
give an example here the Tet Offensive
in Vietnam
I think everyone watching this video who
is older than 50 years old will
immediately know what I talk about when
I say the Tet Offensive and everyone who
is younger than 50 you either don't know
or that's something my grandfather
mentioned one
right the Tet Offensive was remembered
as a victory for the Vietnamese side
that is a lie quantitatively
qualitatively in military terms in
tactical terms and futures in all those
palpable real-world ways the American
side won the Tet Offensive
they caused unbelievable casualties to
the communist side and the Communists I
didn't attain any of its sort of
checklist of objectives what it was they
were trying to actual the targets they
were trying to actually conquer
however the Vietnamese side won a
political victory the photographs of the
sorrow and suffering and death and
carnage and even the poverty that came
back the United States of America from
the Tet Offensive the American public
couldn't rationalize them they couldn't
justify them in their own minds morally
it was seen as disgraceful what America
had done in cinnaminson so this is very
important the American side was
discredited not by its military defeat
but by its military victory in the Tet
Offensive okay the Americans did not
lose the actual combat and now you just
scale it up in round numbers with the
American war in Vietnam you're talking
about over 1 million deaths on the
Communist side pardon me the
pro-communist side over 1 million deaths
and when you get into the numbers the
problem is are you just talking about
combat deaths are you talking about
civilian deaths and this kind of thing
but in any case we're well over a
million in the calculus on that side and
on the pro-american side is it even
60,000 deaths again there are you have a
footnote here within a long list of
considerations for how who gets counted
these deaths do you include people
fighting over the border in Cambodia and
Laos and you know do you include tribal
people in the highlands who signed up to
fight for the
wrench and then continued fighting
against the communists and we're never
really on the American side there are
actually some really strange footnotes
when you get into deals doing the map
but the point is here in general the
number of deaths on the pro-communist
side is unbelievably greater than the
number of deaths within the American
armed forces and even on the American
allied side right so you can look at the
Vietnam War in sort of purely tactical
sense as a victory for the American army
and yet of course this is one of the
most important defeats for the United
States of America in the entire history
of the country is you know devastating
transformative defeat the United States
America they lost politically you know
they could have seen this coming
the United States had a war in the
Philippines that nobody likes to talk
about anymore that war started around
1899 or 1900 1901 when the war starts
you know he can kind of pick a different
point the time line I remember it as
1899 when exactly the you know combat
starts to escalate he's got another
question but right about there the
United States thought of war in the
Philippines and the current conclusions
from the American side or that the
Americans killed more than 1 million
people in the Philippines at that time
conquering the Philippines did the
Americans win this again it's kind of a
similar question can anyone possibly
look back at the American war in the
Philippines and think of it as a victory
10 Estates in in many important ways it
was a devastating demoralizing loss for
America it was a moment when America had
to look in the mirror and behold in its
own reflection
a type of ruthless imperialism right it
was it very deeply shook the moral
foundations of American democracy that
admittedly were somewhat moral shaky
basis anyway due to the history of
genocide of indigenous people and
slavery of african-americans son but
nevertheless what they did in the
Philippines raised new questions to be
answered and those questions could
been answered and should have been
answered precisely to prevent the kind
of horror story of what unfold in the
American war in Vietnam but the lesson
that was there to be learned in the war
in the Philippines is you can kill a
million people and either lose the war
politically or in a sense win the war
would have a completely pure aa
victory have a victory that you regret
have a victory where you look back and
think wow I wish we'd never fought that
war at all another example like this
again so this is I'm gonna jump ahead to
war in Afghanistan in a second another
example is the American military
conquest and occupation of Haiti does
anyone remember that as a victory and is
a horrifying war yes America did conquer
Haiti I mean in terms of the number of
casualties completely asymmetrical you
know and then the United States ruled
Haiti as a military dictatorship under
the command of the US Marine Corps so
this is imperialism in its purest form
military imperialism won the United
States conquered Haiti alright now again
and just to be clear I know this sounds
a bit surreal to say it wasn't the case
that Haiti had diamond mines or oil
fields or some some kind of natural
resource for the Americans to plunder
right there was no benefit to the United
States of America as a democracy or as
an empire or something and obviously
anyone would look back at that worin
Haiti and think wow this was a terrible
thing United States America you could
say it was a moral defeat even though it
was a military victory so there were
lessons to be learned here already in in
the comparisons earlier than the Vietnam
War to the Vietnam War as I've said on
this channel before the Americans did
not think about Vietnam this way instead
the comparisons that provided them with
a moral framework for like a picture
frame for how they were imagining their
purpose there were there their
remarkable success in Japan and then the
remarkable success in South Korea you
could even include here their success in
West Germany now what do these three
have in common
five minutes after America conquered
Japan
the Japanese public themselves produced
a pro-american pro-democracy government
it just it all just seemed to come
together yes I could nail again we could
have a footnote here and we could rest
into some of the details the actual
constitution of Japan was written by
members of the US military staff it's a
somewhat strange story but nevertheless
Japan had a kind of thriving
pro-american democracy
five minutes after America conquered the
great
so this trained the American thing these
terms all they had to do was conquer
Vietnam and then a pro-american
pro-democracy government would would
rise up and replace the Taliban in
Afghanistan right so sorry I'm mixing up
my examples here you can imagine if if
the paradigm you're using from American
history is their success in Japan or
their success in West Germany we're
ganna
seemingly overnight the Nazis were
replaced with a pro-democracy
pro-american government they might think
oh all that America has to do was
conquer Vietnam and then immediately
there will be a pro-american
pro-democracy government take over
Vietnam all that America has to do is
march across Afghanistan and then
somehow liberate the people Afghanistan
to rise up in this and that is of course
a completely ridiculous framework to
view that war whether you're looking
ahead you know looking at the future of
that war when it's ongoing or now
looking back at the past the last twenty
years roughly yeah um so I just say
comparisons of this kind they really do
matter they're faithful and they have a
terrible binding ethical significance
now when Americans look back at the war
in Haiti when Americans look back at the
war in the Philippines and when
Americans now look back at the war in
Afghanistan maybe the facile and easy
conclusion would be to say the only way
to win that war would be to not fight
the war at all okay certainly a lot of
people feel that the American war in
Vietnam that the best way for the
Americans to have one in Vietnam would
be to not fight the war at all well it
is a little bit different though because
as I've said in Vietnam the Americans
won militarily and they lost politically
and that included Lou
the propaganda war a large part of what
people still know about the Vietnam War
today was propaganda produced by the
Vietnamese themselves and then to some
extent propaganda produced by the Soviet
Union and by China but a lot of it was
created by the Vietnamese people
themselves this is not the case at all
in Afghanistan I don't think anyone in
the Western world is influenced by
pro-taliban property it doesn't have
this quality nobody in the press is
reporting the Taliban version of events
as having some kind of equal validity to
the American or European version of
events and you have to give mind during
the Vietnam War that really happened so
you know there'd be negotiations and the
Americans and the French would be
present and then the Soviet Union and
China and some representative of the
Communist side in Vietnam they would
show up and present what they had to say
and they made presentations to the
Western press to and so on
there really was a very successful very
compelling propaganda war coming from
the Vietnam side PW side and that that
also shaped and influenced and
galvanized left-wing movements within
the United States America had really
long-term consequences and you know some
of that propaganda was sort of purely
aesthetic depicting the poverty of the
Vietnamese and their physical smallness
compared to these giant you know
well-fed Americans you know the
Vietnamese people being thin and short
and poverty-stricken and the Americans
being fat and ruthless and terrible how
they depicted things like prostitution
and rape and torture and so on being
done by the Americans there was this you
know very emotionally moving case for
the the victimization of Vietnam but the
Americans that eroded a moral support
for what the Americans were doing and of
course the Americans do indeed deserve a
significant portion of the blame in this
to use just one example condor island
also known as a Sandow Island I think CO
and Dao
kondeh Island you know that was a
torture facility that was used by the
French the French Empire and then when
the Americans began their war in the
area they just took over so
facility they kept doing the same thing
the French Empire been doing in the same
building used the same island facility
so the idea that the United States of
America represented something morally
superior to French imperialism before it
is challenged by this the French Empire
operated a dope-dealing operation
you know the opium trade in Vietnam was
specifically done by the French military
intelligence in the final period of the
French Empire there which is say up to
and during World War two in that final
period of the French Empire
their Intelligence Agency was hustling
opium what did the CIA do they took over
this drug operation so I mean there were
many obvious ways in which the United
States utterly failed to represent some
sort of higher moral standard and the
United States found itself defending the
use of torture for example I still still
see this to this day I see this in new
books you know a new writing about the
American war in Vietnam people people
will point out that the Americans
tortured you used torture in in Vietnam
and Americans will say back well do you
think the communist side was using
torture also like you really think we
were worse than the communist and
they'll give some examples of the conve
torture people this is this is just as
ridiculous as trying to kind of argue on
the basis of moral equality with the
Taliban it's like well the Taliban they
murder and torture people - okay if you
don't represent a dramatically higher
standard of ethical conduct then you
know the Vietnamese communists or the
Taliban then this conversation we're
having is it's happening so all right my
light motif and my conclusion for this
video is this in Afghanistan the
Americans didn't lose politically the
Americans succeeded politically not just
in the propaganda war but in terms of
political reality in the capital city
and all in all two major cities in
Afghanistan they succeeded in creating
elections in creating a democracy in
creating a Free Press and creating you
know
newspapers and radio and TV they created
this kind of infrastructure for
democracy and they created at an
enormous expense to the American
taxpayer they created a system of
education and hospitals and elections
and all the components for a very
fragile democracy in Afghanistan and
politically nobody in the Western world
nobody sympathizes with the Taliban
instead of this fragile democracy so
politically what they did in Afghanistan
was in many ways a success and you know
they only had a few cards in their deck
to play but they played the women's
access to education card and they played
the democracy card they played these
things pretty well so again this is
really the opposite of Vietnam where the
United States really couldn't they
couldn't claim to represent some kind of
legitimate democracy and in their
occupied area of Vietnam and sona's over
a lot long story there so politically
both in terms of the real the reality of
politics and in terms of the propaganda
war America won in Afghanistan but
simply put in Afghanistan America had
military failure it's a military
tactical strategic failure they never
won in terms of actually occupying
occupying the country or even making the
few roads in and out of the capital city
safe for trade is there any truth to the
claim that the American public were lied
to prior to the release of this report
the so called
Afghanistan papers as I mentioned I
don't feel that way I don't think most
of my viewers will feel that way
I think it's been blatantly obvious to
anyone who took even a kind of passing
interest in what was happening in the
Afghan conflict that America was losing
again militarily that they were losing
the war and that you know there never
was a declaration of victory so to speak
what's interesting is that the
Afghanistan papers revealed the internal
analysis of why they were losing and it
shows that many people in the American
military had some quite good ideas of
what was wrong with the American effort
and why they were losing so one of the
leading major generals observed meeting
is
ranked wrong but one of the one of the
most senior commanders interviewed he
puts great emphasis on the fact that in
Congress and in the Senate in the United
States almost nobody can read write or
speak any Afghan language that within
the military in terms of Americans who
had learned the languages of Afghanistan
even though there are more than ten
years into this war they had a small
handful he said a small handful of
people with language abilities and of
course this language ability is very
fundamental to all the other kinds of
meaningful intelligence and
understanding so it's not it doesn't
show you what an external intellectual
snob like me thinks was wrong with the
American war in Afghanistan
it shows what you know commanders and
generals the the men who fought the war
within the Americans said what they
thought was wrong
with the effort if ganna Stan and in
large part they were right they were
fighting a cause that was doomed to fail
they were using the wrong tactics the
wrong methods they had some of the wrong
motivations they had people who lacked
the crucial skills most obviously and
palpably who lacked the language ability
that they lacked an understanding of the
political situation the culture so on
and so forth and the army knew it so
again what we have here really is a kind
of political failure because evidently
in the house of Congress in the Senate
and in the White House they were
incapable of responding to the news of
that failure that was given to them in
these same reports the so called
Afghanistan papers they were handed this
this intelligence hey this is why you
point one you're losing the war point
two this is why you're losing the war
point three here's what you can do about
it and they never did take the steps to
improve what they were doing and so
still today we're stuck with this tragic
outcome